+++
title = "scorecal - Empirical score calibration under the microscope"
date = 2019-08-30T00:01:00+01:00  # Schedule page publish date.
draft = false

# Talk start and end times.
#   End time can optionally be hidden by prefixing the line with `#`.
time_start = 2019-08-30T12:20:00+01:00
time_end = 2019-08-30T12:55:00+01:00

# Abstract and optional shortened version.
abstract = "Score calibration is the process of empirically determining the relationship between a score and an outcome on some population of interest, and scaling is the process of expressing that relationship in agreed units. Calibration is often treated as a simple matter and attacked with simple tools – typically, either assuming the relationship between score and log-odds is linear and fitting a logistic regression with the score as the only covariate, or dividing the score range into bands and plotting the empirical log-odds as a function of score band.\n\nBoth approaches ignore some information in the data. The assumption of a linear score to log-odds relationship is too restrictive and score banding ignores the continuity of the scores. While a linear score to log-odds relationship is often an adequate approximation, the reality can be much more interesting, with noticeable deviations from the linear trend. These deviations include large-scale non-linearity, small-scale non-monotonicity, discrete discontinuities, and complete breakdown of the linear trend at extreme scores.\n\nDetecting these effects requires a more sophisticated approach to empirically determining the score to outcome relationship. Taking a more sophisticated approach can be surprisingly tricky: the typically strong linear trend can obscure smaller deviations from linearity; detecting subtle trends requires exploiting the continuity of the scores, which can obscure discrete deviations; trends at extreme scores (out in the data-sparse tails of the distribution of scores) can be obscured by trends at less extreme scores (where there is more data); score distributions with some specific values that are relatively common can disrupt methods relying on continuity; and any modelling technique can introduce its own biases.\n\nOver the years I have developed a personal approach to these issues in score calibration and implemented them as an open source, publicly accessible R package for score calibration. I discuss these technical issues in empirical score calibration and show how they are addressed in the scorecal package."

abstract_short = ""

# Name of event and optional event URL.
event = "Credit Scoring and Credit Control Conference XVI"
event_url = "http://crc.business-school.ed.ac.uk/conferences"

# Location of event.
location = ""

# Is this a selected talk? (true/false)
selected = false

# Projects (optional).
#   Associate this talk with one or more of your projects.
#   Simply enter the filename of your project file in `content/project/`.
#   E.g. `projects = ["deep-learning.md"]` references `content/project/deep-learning.md`.
#   Otherwise, set `projects = []`.
projects = ["score-calibration.md"]

# Tags (optional).
#   Set `tags = []` for no tags, or use the form `tags = ["A Tag", "Another Tag"]` for one or more tags.
tags = ["credit-scoring", "calibration"]

# Links (optional).
url_pdf = ""
url_slides = "http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3381658"
url_video = ""
url_code = "http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3381641"

# Does the content use math formatting?
math = false

# Does the content use source code highlighting?
highlight = true

# Featured image
# Place your image in the `static/img/` folder and reference its filename below, e.g. `image = "example.jpg"`.
[header]
image = "cscc2019.png"
caption = "Score band and smoothing spline calibration"

+++
